---
layout: page
title: Plugins
description: "?"
category: articles
---

Plugins are code that can be loaded into your build rules to define new tasks or settings. Usually they add support for a specific language or tool. For example, to load support for mocha (a javascript test system):

```coffeescript
load "mocha"
```

The `load` function works just like node's `require` function, with a few twists:

- The plugin name is prefixed with "plz-", so the module name for "mocha" is "plz-mocha".
- Before checking normal node paths, plz will check:
    - `$HOME/.plz/plugins` -- where `$HOME` is your home folder
    - `$PROJECT/.plz/plugins` -- where `$PROJECT` is the folder where the plz rules file was found
    - the environment variable `PLZ_PATH` if it's defined
- Any exports from the module are discarded.

The plugin may be written in either javascript or coffee-script.

Plugins are executed in the same namespace as the build script, so they can
modify globals. (This is unusual in coffeescript, but normal in javascript.)

A module can define multiple plugins by assigning functions to the global `plugin` object. For example, this module defines two plugins, "c++" and "c--":

```coffeescript
plugins["c++"] = ->
  task "build", ->
    exec "g++ ..."

plugins["c--"] = ->
  task "build", ->
    exec "g-- ..."
```

When loading a plugin by name, plz will first check if there's an entry in the global `plugins` object of that name, and if so, it will just call that function. Otherwise, it will load the "plz-(name)" module according to the rules above. Then it will check again for a `plugins` function and call it if it exists, in case the loaded module just added a few new plugins to the global object.

A couple of plugins are built-in, as demos and to handle common tasks.


## <a name="clean"></a> Clean / distclean

https://github.com/robey/plz/blob/master/plz-builtins/src/plz-builtins.coffee

Two tasks, "clean" and "distclean" are created automatically by plz if their corresponding settings exist. Each setting is an array of file or folder names. When the task is executed, these files and folders are erased.

For example, if your java compiler puts compiled class files into `build/classes/`, you can add a setting like:

```coffeescript
settings.clean = [ "./build/classes" ]
```

The concepts of "clean" and "distclean" come from the unix `make` world:

- "clean" should erase any build product that is easily re-created by running another build. In "plz", this often means any file that is generated by file-watching tasks, like the files generated by compilers, code generators, minifiers, and so on.
- "distclean" should erase any file that wouldn't exist in a freshly-downloaded source package. The idea is to restore your folder to a brand-new state. Any files generated by inspecting your environment (like the output files of GNU "configure") should be erased.

For higher-level languages like javascript/coffee-script, it's unusual to have any files erased by "distclean", but the ability is there if you want it. No judgement.


## <a name="mocha"></a> Mocha

https://github.com/robey/plz/blob/master/plz-builtins/src/plugins/mocha.coffee

[Mocha](http://visionmedia.github.io/mocha/) is a unit test system for javascript & coffee-script. The plz mocha plugin attaches to the "test" task, watches for any source or test-source changes, and runs the mocha binary.

The `settings` object gets a `mocha` sub-object with the following settings:

- `bin: "./node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha"` -- where is mocha installed in this project?
- `source: "./lib"` -- where does javascript source live?
- `testSource: "./test"` -- where does test source live?
- `display: "spec"` -- which mocha display engine should it use?
- `grep: null` -- what (if anything) should be passed to `--grep`?
- `options: [ "--colors" ]` -- what other options should be passed?

Because all settings can be specified on the command-line, here's one way to run only the tests with "brick" in their name, using the "nyan-cat" display enigne:

```bash
$ plz test mocha.display=nyan mocha.grep=brick
```

To specify that your test source lives in `src/test/`, you would add a line like this to `build.plz`:

```coffeescript
settings.mocha.testSource = "./src/test"
```


## <a name="coffee-script"></a> Coffee-script

https://github.com/robey/plz/blob/master/plz-builtins/src/plugins/coffeescript.coffee

If the coffee-script plugin ("coffee") is loaded:

- the project type is changed to "coffee"
- a task is attached to "build" which watches `*.coffee` files in the source folder, compiles them with the coffee-script compiler, and places them into the target folder
- the coffee-script compiler is added to mocha's command-line options
- `*.coffee` is added to the file watches for the "test" task

The `settings` object gets a `coffee` sub-object with the following settings:

- `bin: "./node_modules/coffee-script/bin/coffee"` -- where is the coffee-script compiler installed in this project?
- `target: "./lib"` -- where should compiled javascript live?
- `source: "./src"` -- where is the coffee-script source found?
- `options: []` -- what other options should be passed to the compiler?

For example, to have the compiled javascript placed in `build/`, you would add a line like this to `build.plz`:

```coffeescript
settings.coffee.target = "./build"
```
