---
layout: page
title: Basic tasks
description: "?"
category: articles
---

Plz tries to stay out of your way as much as possible, so there are no tasks defined by default.

But there is a standard workflow, dating from the days of `make` and unix, that plz tries to conform to. Plugins will usually attach themselves to one or more of these well-known task names, and plz will generate a few of these tasks for you if you ask.


## <a name="clean"></a> clean

"clean" should erase any build product that is easily re-created by running another build. In "plz", this often means any file that is generated by file-watching tasks, like the files generated by compilers, code generators, minifiers, and so on.

This is often used to reset your workspace to a known state when debugging compiled languages, especially when the build system (cough) may have not understood the full set of things to be rebuilt.

Plz will automatically generate a "clean" task if you define the `clean` setting. It should be a list of files and folders to erase.

For example, if your java compiler puts compiled class files into `build/classes/`:

```coffeescript
settings.clean = [ "./build/classes" ]
```

"clean" will also turn off file watches (see [Configuration](./available-functions.html#configuration)), so that tasks that were watching the deleted files won't trigger. It also deletes the plz "state file" (usually `.plz/state`) so that the next time plz runs, all watched files will look new.


## <a name="distclean"></a> distclean

"distclean" should erase any file that wouldn't exist in a freshly-downloaded source package. The idea is to restore your folder to a brand-new state. Any files generated by inspecting your environment (like the output files of GNU "configure") should be erased.

Plz will automatically generate a "distclean" task if you define the `distclean` *and* `clean` settings. `distclean` should be a list of files and folders to erase. The "distclean" task has a "must" dependency on the "clean" task, so running "distclean" will always run "clean" first.

For higher-level languages like javascript/coffee-script, it's unusual to have any files erased by "distclean", but the ability is there if you want it. No judgement.


## <a name="build"></a> build

"build" should run your normal build process, usually compiling files or something similar. There's no default "build" task, but plugins that have a compile phase (like the "coffee" plugin) will attach to "build" to run the compiler.

Often, a "build" will trigger "test" through file watches, since in some philosophies, a build is not complete until the unit tests have run.


## <a name="test"></a> test

"test" should run your unit tests, assuming you were good and wrote some. There's no default "test" task, but plugins for a test system (like "mocha") will attach to "test" to build and run the tests.

The "test" task depends on "build", so if the "build" task is going to run, it will run first.


## <a name="install"></a> install

"install" should install any finished executables, documentation, libraries, and so on, so that they can be used outside this folder. There's no default "install" task, but plugins will attach to "install" for this purpose.

